AI functionality in JabRef (#93)
JabRef/blog.jabref.org: _posts/2024-08-16-AI-chatting.md

---
title: "Introducing AI Features in JabRef"
tags: [ai, gsoc]
author: "[Ruslan](https://github.com/InAnYan)"
---

> My name is Ruslan. I’m a novice contributor to JabRef, currently working on an AI project for [Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My name is Ruslan and currently working on integrating AI into JabRef in the context of [Google Summer of Code 2024](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).
```

﻿I am thrilled to present the cutting-edge AI capabilities now integrated into JabRef, namely the "AI Summary" and the "AI Chat" features. These Innovations are designed to revolutionize your research experience!

In short:

- **AI Summary**: With this feature, you can generate a summary of a research paper
- **AI Chat**: This feature allows you to chat with your scientific papers

## AI Summary

I have introduced a new entry editor tab named "AI Summary". Here, you can use the AI to generate a quick overview of the scientific paper.

![AI summary tab screenshot](../img/AiSummary.png)

The AI highlights the main objectives of the research, the methods used, the key findings and the conclusions.

## AI Chat

The next new entry editor tab is "AI Chat," where all the questions and answers (Q&A) happen.

In the window below, you can see the following elements:

- The chat history with your messages
- A button called "submit" that allows you to send a message (also commonly called "prompting")
- A button for clearing the chat history

![AI chat tab screenshot](../img/AiChat.png)

> 

Reviewer: No double empty lines

```suggestion
```

Finally, iF you are asking yourself, where can I find an API key and what is it even? Please head to the [AI user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/ai-providers-and-api-keys) to learn about how to receive a key and where to enter it in the preferences.

## AI preferences

Yes, by the way, there are some new options in the JabRef preferences, such as

- "Enable AI functionality in JabRef": by default it is turned off, so you need to check this option if you want to use the new AI features.
- "AI provider": you can choose either OpenAI, Mistral AI, or Hugging Face.
- "Chat model": choose the model you like
- "API token": here you write your API token.
- "Expert settings": the defaults provide good results. In case you would like to modify them, our [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai) provides an explanation of it.

![AI preferences](../img/AiPreferences.png)

## BONUS

> Have you ever considered running a local LLM on your computer while ensuring complete privacy?

Reviewer 2: If you are considering running a local LLM on your computer to ensure complete privacy, check out my tutorial ...

For Mistral AI you might need to make a subscription, while for OpenAI you can send money one time.

Hugging Face gives you access to numerous count of models for free.
However, it will take a very long time for Hugging Face to find a free computer resources for you, and the response time will be also long.

In order to use any service, you always need an API key.
Please head to the [AI user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/ai-providers-and-api-keys) to learn about how to receive a key and where to enter it in the preferences.

## AI preferences

Here are some new options in the JabRef preferences.

![AI preferences](../img/AiPreferences.png)

- "Enable AI functionality in JabRef": by default it is turned off, so you need to check this option, if you want to use the new AI features
- "AI provider": you can choose either OpenAI, Mistral AI, or Hugging Face
- "Chat model": choose the model you like (for OpenAI we recommend `gpt-4o-mini`, as to date, it is the cheapest and fastest, although we also recommend to look up the prices from time to time, as they are subject to change)
- "API token": here you write your API token

> - "Expert settings": here you can change the parameters that affect how AI will generate your answers. If you don't understand the meaning of those settings, don't worry! We have experimented a lot and found the best parameters for you! But if you are curious, then you can refer to [user documentation]()

Reviewer: Can you please rephrase "If you don't understand ... best parameters for you!" to a more professional sounding wording? Maybe: "The defaults provide good results. In case you would like to modify them, our [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/preferences#ai-expert-settings) provides an explanation of it"

(This also adds the link to the user documentation. Currently, the link is empty.)

## BONUS

> Have you ever wanted to try running a local LLM model on your computer with 100% privacy saved? We got you.

Reviewer: Can we please rephrase this to a more professional sounding wording?

We wrote a tutorial of how to install and use `ollama` and integrate it in JabRef.

You find more information at the [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/local-llm).

> ## End

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Are you curious?

Try the AI features in our current development version and play around with the new feature 
```

---
title: "Introducing AI Features in JabRef"
tags: [ai, gsoc]
author: "[Ruslan](https://github.com/InAnYan)"
---

> My name is Ruslan. I’m a novice contributor to JabRef, currently working on an AI project for [Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).
> 
> I want to introduce you to the new AI features in JabRef.
> 
> - AI can generate for you a summary of a research paper
> - You can also chat with papers using a smart AI assistant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My name is Ruslan. I’m a novice contributor to JabRef, currently working on an AI project for [Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/). My delivered contributions to JabRef is the introduction of two AI features: AI-based summarization of papers and "chatting" with papers using an AI assistant.
```

## AI summary tab

> We have introduced a new entry editor tab, "AI Summary," where AI generates a quick overview of the paper for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I introduced a new entry editor tab, "AI Summary," where AI generates a quick overview of the paper for you.
```

![AI summary tab screenshot](../img/AiSummary.png)

The AI highlights the main objectives of the research, methods used, key findings, and conclusions for you

## AI chat tab

The next new entry editor tab is "AI Chat," where all the questions and answers (Q&A) happen.

![AI chat tab screenshot](../img/AiChat.png)

In this window, you can see the following elements:

- Chat history with your messages
- Prompt for sending messages
- A button for clearing the chat history (just in case)

Let's try it out on a paper "Cooper, K., Donovan, J., Waterhouse, A., & Williamson, G. (2007). Cocoa and health: a decade of research. *British Journal of Nutrition*, 99(1), 1–11. doi:[10.1017/s0007114507795296](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114507795296)"

Let's ask about the chocolate.

![AI first question and answer](../img/AiQuestion1.png)

Correct! The authors discuss chocolate components extensively and how it can be a powerful antioxidant.

I was wondering, how much chocolate should a human eat in a day? Let's dive in this topic.

![AI second question and answer](../img/AiQuestion2.png)

> *Only 40 grams?* Well, our health is our wealth. And AI helped us to uncover this information!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Only 40 grams?* Well, our health is our wealth. Exciting that AI helped us to uncover this information!
```

## How does this work?

In the background, JabRef analyses the linked PDF files of library entries. After indexing, this information is supplied to the AI, which, in our case, is a Large Language Model (LLM).

> The LLM is currently not stored on your computer. Instead, we have many integrations with AI providers (OpenAI, Mistral AI, Hugging Face), so you can choose the one you like the most.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LLM itself is currently not stored on your computer. Instead, we have many integrations with AI providers (OpenAI, Mistral AI, Hugging Face), so you can choose the one you like the most.
```

> We send chunks of text to AI service and then receive processed responses. To use it, you need to configure JabRef with your API key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JabRef sends chunks of text to AI service and then receive processed responses. To use it, you need to configure JabRef with your API key.
```

## Which AI provider should I use?

For now, we recommend you choosing [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For Mistral AI, you might need to make a subscription, whereas for OpenAI, a one-time payment option is available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Mistral AI, you might need to make a subscription, whereas for OpenAI, a one-time payment option is available.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Hugging Face gives you access to numerous count of models for free.
However, it may take a long time for Hugging Face to allocate free computing resources, resulting in longer response times

In order to use any service, you always need an API key.
Please head to the [AI user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/ai-providers-and-api-keys) to learn about how to receive a key and where to enter it in the preferences.

## AI preferences

Here are some new options in the JabRef preferences.

![AI preferences](../img/AiPreferences.png)

> - "Enable AI functionality in JabRef": by default it is turned off, so you need to check this option if you want to use the new AI features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Enable AI functionality in JabRef": by default it is turned off, so you need to check this option if you want to use the new AI features.
```

> - "AI provider": you can choose either OpenAI, Mistral AI, or Hugging Face

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "AI provider": you can choose either OpenAI, Mistral AI, or Hugging Face.
```

> - "Chat model": choose the model you like (for OpenAI we recommend `gpt-4o-mini`, as to date, it is the cheapest and fastest, though we also recommend to look up the prices periodically, as they are subject to change)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Chat model": choose the model you like (for OpenAI we recommend `gpt-4o-mini`, as to date, it is the cheapest and fastest, though we also recommend to look up the prices periodically, as they are subject to change).
```

> - "API token": here you write your API token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "API token": here you write your API token.
```

> - "Expert settings": the defaults provide good results. In case you would like to modify them, our [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai) provides an explanation of it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Expert settings": the defaults provide good results. In case you would like to modify them, our [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai) provides an explanation of it.
```

## BONUS

Have you ever considered running a local LLM on your computer while ensuring complete privacy?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We wrote a tutorial of how to install and use `ollama` and integrate it in JabRef.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``

You find more information at the [user documentation](https://docs.jabref.org/ai/local-llm).

## Are you curious?

> Try the AI features in our current development version and explore the new functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try the AI features in our [current development version](https://builds.jabref.org/main/) and explore the new functionality.
```

> Thank you for using JabRef and checking out the AI functionality!
> 

Reviewer: This can be removed, can't it?

```suggestion
```

We value your opinion and want to know: What AI features would you like to see in JabRef in the future? What LLMs or other integrations would you like in upcoming versions?

> 

Reviewer: Merge with the previous paragraph?

```suggestion
```

author: "[Ruslan](https://github.com/InAnYan)"
---

> My name is Ruslan and currently working on integrating AI into JabRef in the context of [Google Summer of Code 2024](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
My name is Ruslan and I am currently working on integrating AI into JabRef in the context of [Google Summer of Code 2024](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).
```
